Alaska Spring Ice Breakup Outlook
There is an average potential for spring ice breakup and snowmelt flooding for most of the state with a few exceptions. The potential for ice jam flooding along the Upper Yukon River is above average due to freeze up ice jams which resulted in jumbled ice that is likely thicker than average.  The ice jam and snowmelt flooding potential in the Upper Tanana River Basin and areas of the Copper River Basin is above average due to a well above normal snowpack. This outlook is based on observed snowpack, ice thickness reports, and seasonal temperature outlooks.
River Ice
River ice observations are available for a limited number of observing sites in Alaska.  Late February and early March measurements and reports indicate that ice thickness is slightly thinner than average.  Ice measurements in the Interior are generally 70 - 90% of average, with one site reporting 130% of average. On the Kuskokwim River, observers reported thinner than average ice due to early season snow and a mild start to the winter with one localized freeze up jam and thicker ice reported near Aniak. A series of freeze up jams on the Upper Yukon River resulted in high water levels during freeze up with rough ice that is likely thicker than average. 

Cumulative freezing degree days (FDD), which can serve as an indicator of ice thickness, are generally near normal statewide.  FDD are 80 - 90% of normal on the North Slope and 90 - 100% of normal for the rest of mainland Alaska. 
Snowpack
Analysis of the March 1st snowpack by the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) indicates an above normal snowpack for the majority of the state.  

The snowpack in the Upper Yukon (largely in Canada) is above normal; snow surveys reported 100 - 150% of normal.  Near the US/Canadian Border, stations reported 150% of normal at the Boundary and Chicken sites, decreasing to 90 - 120% of normal further east, with Mayo at 122%, Burns Lake at 114% and Edwards Lake at 96%. The FortyMile River, which flows into the Yukon River upstream of Eagle is at 150% of normal, with Mt Fairplay at 165% of normal, and Chicken, Boundary, and Three Fingers sites all near 150% of normal.  The Tanana River basin average is approximately 140% of normal, with the outliers of Tok and Chisana near the Canadian border at 200% and 175% of normal, respectively. The Middle Yukon River basin, from Fort Yukon to Galena, is at approximately 130% of normal as reported by nine stations. Data are available for two stations in the Koyukuk basin; Bettles in the southern Brooks Range and Coldfoot to the northeast reported 120% and 84% of normal, respectively.  Four sites on the Lower Yukon, downstream of Galena, reported approximately 120% of normal.  

The Kuskokwim Basin in southwest Alaska is likely above normal.  Telaquana Lake in the headwaters of the basin recorded the fourth highest value in twenty five years of operation and sites in McGrath reported  considerably above average snowpack. 

For the Arctic, the snowpack ranges from slightly below normal along the western North Slope to slightly above normal to the east of the Dalton Highway. 

In Southcentral Alaska, the Copper Basin reported approximately 140% of normal, with the highest snowpack in the northern portion of the basin at 200% of normal. For the Susitna River, the basin average is 125% of normal, with Talkeetna and Susitna Valley High at 140% and 146% of normal, Skwentna at 101% of normal, and the East Fork of the Chulitna at 90% of normal. 

Stations on the Kenai Peninsula are reporting a range of values, with the headwaters of the Kenai River at near normal snowpack, and Port Graham on the southern tip of the peninsula at 180% of normal.
Climate Outlook
The most important factor determining the severity of ice breakup remains the weather during
April and May. Dynamic breakups with a high potential for ice jam flooding typically require
cooler than average temperatures for most of April followed by an abrupt transition to warm,
summer-like temperatures in late April to early May.

The Climate Prediction Center (CPC) outlook for April suggests increased chances of above average temperatures for the northeast portions of the state and chances of below average temperatures for the southwest areas of Alaska including the lower reaches of the Kuskokwim and Yukon Rivers. The longer Three Month Outlook, which includes March, April and May, indicates increased chances for above average temperatures across the North Slope.  

This temperature paradigm for April would increase the overall flood potential along the lower Kuskokwim and Yukon Rivers. These larger rivers in Alaska are westward flowing, and cooler temperatures on the west coast would keep stronger ice in place while warmer temperatures to the northeast could accelerate snowmelt, increasing the chances for a dynamic breakup and ice jams.  

